# The Wizard and the Prophet: Science and the future of our Planet

## Charles C. Mann

*lu en 2020*



1. To Borlaug, human ingenuity was the solution to our problems. One example: by using the advanced methods of the Green Revolution to increase per-acre yields, he argued, farmers would not have to plant as many acres. (Researchers call this the Borlaug hypothesis.)
2. If a government persuades its citizenry to spend huge sums revamping offices, stores, and homes with the high-tech insulation and low-water-use plumbing urged by Prophets, the same citizenry will resist ponying up for Wizards’ new-design nuclear plants and monster desalination facilities.
3. People who back Borlaug and embrace genetically modified, hyper-productive wheat and rice won’t follow Vogt and dump their steaks and chops for low-impact veggie burgers.
4. Most of all, the clash between Vogtians and Borlaugians is heated because it is less about facts than about values. 
5. And all of them were about, at least in part, the relationship of our species to Nature—which is to say they were debates about the nature of our species.
6. case, the body louse seemed to have separated from the head louse about 107,000 years ago. This meant, Stoneking hypothesized, that clothing also dated from about 107,000 years ago.
7. When scientists list mammals in order of their genetic diversity, humans are at the bottom, along with endangered species like wolverines and lynxes.
8. New mutations can arise and spread; a snippet of scrambled DNA in a single gene in a single member of the small group that
9. No more than a few hundred people initially left Africa, if geneticists are correct. And for a long time their geographic expansion was not matched by an increase in population. As recently as ten thousand years ago we numbered perhaps 5 million, about
10. Economists talk about the “discount rate,” which is their term for the way that humans almost always value the local, concrete, and immediate over the faraway, abstract, and distant in time. We care more about the broken stoplight up the street now than social unrest next year in Chechnya, Cambodia, or the Congo. Rightly so, evolutionists say: Americans are far more likely to be killed at that stoplight today than in the Congo next year. Yet here we are asking governments to focus on potential planetary boundaries that may not be reached for decades or even centuries. Given the discount rate, nothing could be more understandable than a government’s failure to grapple with, say, climate change.
    
11. Because no treatment existed for the parasite, researchers believed that it could best be fought by eliminating the wetlands that were the breeding grounds for its mosquito hosts. During the First World War, according to the historian Gordon Patterson, workers in eastern states dug ditches to drain ponds and marshes, then sprayed heavy oil or insecticide into the water to poison remaining mosquito larvae. In the Depression,
    
12. Washington took over the campaign; ditch-digging was instant work for the jobless. Thousands of newly hired mosquito-fighters cut and poisoned tens of thousands of miles of drainage ditches. So many ditches were dug so fast that in some places local governments lost track of them and begged Washington to conduct surveys to identify them.
    
13. People can avoid reproducing at the maximum rate, Malthus admitted, by using what he called “preventive checks”—practices that lower birth rates. Among these are celibacy, birth control, delayed marriage, reduced wages (so would-be parents can’t afford children), and increased education (which Malthus thought would make couples aware of the risks of reproduction).
    
14. Perched atop their empires, Europeans and Americans feared losing their thrones to swarming mobs of inferiors. Voices shouted that rich nations, torpid with prosperity, were allowing lesser races to overwhelm them by unfettered breeding. So low were European and U.S. rates of reproduction that the West was said to be committing “race suicide.” Among the most influential of these voices was Lothrop Stoddard, author of The Rising Tide of Color Against White World-Supremacy, a big hit in 1920. Stoddard’s father was a famous photographer who introduced millions of middle-class Americans to images of people from faraway places. Stoddard himself became a fierce anti-immigration
    
15. English linguist-philosopher Charles Kay Ogden. Marchant, head of the British National Council of Public Morals, was famed for his campaign against impure thoughts.
    
16. More striking still, many of the racial alarmists were also leaders in the nation’s new conservation movement.
    
17. The blue-blooded toffs who feared that the noble and superior white race was menaced by unwashed rabble also saw wild landscapes as noble and superior wildernesses menaced by the same rabble. Prizing the expert governance of resources, they found little difference between protecting forests and cleaning up the human gene pool.
    
18. So ineradicable was the elitist mark on conservation that for decades afterward many on the left scoffed at ecological issues as right-wing distractions. As late as 1970, the radical Students for a Democratic Society protested the first Earth Day as Wall Street flimflam meant to divert public attention from class warfare and the Vietnam War; the left-wing journalist I. F. Stone called the nationwide marches a “snow job.”
    
19. Road was condemned by Roman Catholics, because it advocated birth control; by conservatives, because it supported state regulation; and by business interests, because it attacked capitalism (the Reader’s Digest condensation excised Vogt’s critiques of the free market). But the greatest ire came from the left. Denouncing the book as a “totally unaware,” “incoherent,” “screaming” “bill of goods,” The Nation magazine called Vogt’s ecology proof of “science’s bankruptcy in the face of pressing modern problems.”
    
20. Unsurprisingly, the two books were in some ways quite similar—and not just in that both railed against a new chemical called DDT. They were jointly inventing a new literary genre: the concerned report on the global condition.
    
21. They were the first to portray our ecological worries as a single Earth-sized problem for which the human species is to blame.
    
22. And by stating that the problem is one interconnected, worldwide issue, rather than something local or national, they implicitly argued that ecological issues could only be solved by a unified global effort, administered by global experts—by people, that is, like Vogt and Osborn.
    
23. Vogt and Osborn were also the first to bring to a wide public a belief that would become a foundation of environmental thought: consumption driven by capitalism and rising human numbers is the ultimate cause of most of the world’s ecological problems, and only dramatic reductions in human fertility and economic activity will prevent a worldwide calamity. Of the two, Road had greater
    
24. Ecological collapse tomorrow would lead the day after to nuclear war. If humankind kept ignoring ecological realities, he warned, there is little probability that mankind can long escape the searing downpour of war’s death from the skies. And when this comes, in the judgement of some of the best informed authorities, it is probable that at least three-quarters of the human race will be wiped out.
    
25. Road laid out the basic tenets for a now-common way of thought: environmentalism. Environmentalism is more than the simple recognition that polluting a neighbor’s well or destroying a bald eagle’s nest is a bad idea. In most cases that recognition can be viewed as a function of property rights. By poisoning a well, a polluter is, in effect, seizing the water without its owner’s permission. (More precisely, it is seizing use of the water.) The eagles, too, are being taken from their owner, the public. Environmentalism, by contrast, is a political and moral movement based on a set of beliefs about nature and the human place within it.
    
26. Any set of beliefs about the workings of the world is perforce a statement about what is good and important in that world. Environmentalism is an argument that respecting the rules of nature is indispensable to having a good society and living a good life.
    
27. Road to Survival had two main innovations. The first, as the environmental historians Paul Warde and Sverker Sörlin note, was introducing “the idea of the environment.”
    
28. In the second of Road’s main innovations, Vogt summed up the relationship between humanity and this global environment with a single concept: carrying capacity. It is hard to overstate the importance of this.
    
29. Alexander Hamilton opposed Jefferson’s beliefs as unsound, these people see the best way to live with nature as gathering into big cities (which are said to use less resources than spread-out local communities), increasing productivity (because fewer people
    
30. directly work the land, maximizing output per person), and growing more prosperous (because affluence makes societies better able to clean up environmental mishaps).
    
31. what the Yale historian Timothy Snyder describes as “an extreme articulation of the nineteenth-century commonplace that human activities could be understood as biology,” Hitler viewed our species as a group of genetically distinct races warring for survival. Echoing Malthus, Hitler insisted that “regardless of how [any race] raises the productivity of the land…, the disproportionate population in relation to the land…remains.” As a result, the duty of Hitler and every other racial leader was to “reestablish an acceptable ratio between population and land area”—that is, to feed their ever-growing races by seizing an ever-greater share of the planet’s finite resources.
    
32. a feed of oats morning, noon, and night.” Its steel body did not need salves, rubdowns, or currycombs. On small farms like Henry Borlaug’s, as much as half of the land was devoted to providing feed for the animals
    
33. “Man minus the machine is a slave,” proclaimed Henry Ford, touting his new tractor. “Man plus the machine is a free man.” Decades afterward, looking back on the Model F, Borlaug agreed entirely. “Relief from endless drudgery,” he said, “equated to emancipation from servitude.”
    
34. By 1940 the eleven thousand new ejidos were working almost 2.5 million acres of land that had been left alone ten years before. Unsurprisingly, the consequences were often destructive; erosion and soil depletion soared. Much of the devastation that Vogt saw as the unavoidable consequence of high birth rates was tied to political events that were anything but inevitable; much of the poverty that Stakman, Mangelsdorf, and Bradfield saw as lack of access to knowledge was the result of efforts by wealthy elites to maintain their position.
    
35. Again and again, he encountered people who had been so badly abused by authority that they clung to beliefs Borlaug found irrational. If Borlaug offered to procure steel plows and hoes, they told him that metal siphoned “heat” from the soil. If he asked about fertilizer, they told him it was a government plot against the farmer. Each conversation was like being thrust into a wildland of confusion and despair.
    
36. He called on the mills and told their owners that next harvest they would be getting batches of poor-quality grain from Sonora and they should—they would—buy it anyway, because it would be good for the country, absorbing the losses was their patriotic duty, and it would be only one or two seasons because he would fix the dwarf strains in the interim. (He was right; the better varieties were released in 1962.)
    
37. success. In the ass-end of nowhere Borlaug and his Mexican team had created something new to the world: an all-purpose wheat. Short, fecund, and disease-resistant, it could be sown in soil rich or poor anywhere in Mexico and produce well. As long as farmers provided water and fertilizer, the plant would thrive and the harvest would be large.
    
38. Because that world will be (almost certainly) more numerous and (probably) more affluent, it is commonly stated that harvests will have to double by 2050. Some researchers believe this figure is overstated—a 50 percent increase would do the trick. In either case, though, how can it be done?
    
39. When farmers put additives like ashes, blood, urine, compost, and animal feces in their fields, they are providing fodder for nitrogen-fixing soil microorganisms; when they grow legumes, it increases the supply of nitrogen-fixing bacteria. The implication of Liebig’s work was that dumping artificially created nitrogen compounds—chemical fertilizers—into fields would do the same thing.
    
40. nitrogen. The world’s biggest nitrate deposits are in the high desert of northern Chile. Although it almost never rains there, the area is constantly bathed in a fine spray from the Pacific Ocean.
    
41. At the time, the biggest known fertilizer source was Peruvian guano. As demand drove up prices and reduced supplies, attention turned to sodium nitrate. Sodium nitrate (NaNO3) consists of a sodium atom, a nitrogen atom, and three oxygen atoms, all bound together loosely enough for plants to assimilate the nitrogen. The world’s biggest nitrate deposits are in the high desert of northern Chile. Although it almost never rains there, the area is constantly bathed in a fine spray from the Pacific Ocean.
    
42. Howard became the nucleus of a small but influential movement, the influence due partly to the fact that many of its members were aristocratic Christians who saw industrial agriculture as a threat to both the social and divine orders.
    
43. Boldfaced names like Lord Bledisloe (governor of New Zealand), the Duke of Bedford (founder of the humus-promoting, anti-Semitic British People’s Party), and Lord Northbourne (author of Look to the Land) were among its most prominent exponents. Howard himself was knighted in 1934. Indeed, toffs were so heavily represented in the Soil Association, Britain’s leading farm-reform organization, that its early meetings were like house parties at Downton Abbey, except that the discussions over sherry were about manure and earthworms.
    
44. Exemplary in these respects was Howard’s leading convert, Soil Association founder and president Lady Eve Balfour, author of The Living Soil (1943). Balfour’s background was a mix of money, power, and mysticism: one of her grandfathers was viceroy of India; the other, a socially prominent occultist and writer.
    
45. soil. Not until years after Vogt left Peru did researchers learn the answer: nitrogen is critical to photosynthesis.
    
46. The situation is different today. Farmers can’t plant much more land; in Asia, almost every acre of arable soil is already in use. Indeed, as cities expand into the countryside the supply of farmland may be decreasing. Nor can fertilizer be increased; it is already being overused everywhere (except some parts of Africa). Irrigation, too, cannot readily be expanded. Most land that can be irrigated is already irrigated. Some increase in actual yield is certainly possible. But most scientists believe they must raise the potential yield—which brings us back to rubisco.
    
47. Without scientific expertise himself, Rifkin was notorious for stoking alarms that researchers found absurd. In his ice-minus complaint, for example, he claimed that because “the naturally occurring ice-nucleating bacteria blown by the wind into the upper atmosphere may play a role in the global climate,” the “recombinant DNA mutant bacteria” could alter weather patterns across the world. This was nonsense—P. syringae can’t live in the air, isn’t blown into the upper atmosphere, and doesn’t affect the climate.
    
48. Contrast the behavior of the European and North American consumers who fear putting GMOs into their bodies as food with that of the European and North American patients who willingly put GMOs into their bodies as medicine. Genetically modified E. coli creates synthetic insulin for diabetics; genetically modified baker’s yeast produces hepatitis B vaccine; genetically modified mammal cells make blood factor VIII for hemophiliacs and tissue plasminogen activator for heart-attack victims.
    
49. The conundrum is that poor nations are less likely to accept an innovation if it is rejected by their richer neighbors—it can become stigmatized. The stigma turns into outright economic harm if the rich nations ban the innovation; if C4 rice cannot be exported, farmers seeking extra cash are less likely to grow it. The action by which middle-class people refuse to take risks on behalf of rich companies becomes a way of blocking aspirations of the distant poor. Weighing the relative pluses and minuses
    
50. Half a dozen new Jewish settlements around Jaffa were modeled on Howard’s ideas. Over the years so many Jews moved to them that what had originally been suburban villages swelled into the city of Tel Aviv, which swallowed Jaffa.
    
51. Rapid urbanization is a hallmark of our age. In 1950 fewer than one out of three of the world’s people lived in cities. By 2050, according to United Nations projections, the figure will be almost two out of three.
    
52. So long is the litany of government failure in urban water systems that in the 1990s organizations like the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund began to argue for turning over water management to the private sector. One of the biggest examples was China, where in 2002 the Shanghai government contracted the task of expanding and operating Pudong’s new water system to a French company named Veolia. In return for $243 million and a fifty-year, 50 percent stake in Pudong’s water utility, Veolia became very, very busy.
    
53. It was founded in 1853 by Napoleon III, France’s last emperor, along with many French nobles, and financed by the bankers Baron de Rothschild and Charles Lafitte. The Compagnie Générale des Eaux, as it was then called, became an essential part of the emperor’s plan to modernize his country.
    
54. switch and feel hot air gush into the room. The average American car engine is, unthinkably, more than two hundred horsepower—as if every suburban Mom and Dad had two hundred ponies at their disposal, but without the need to feed the animals, take them to the veterinarian, or shovel their manure.
    
55. Time after time, decade after decade, new supplies have been found and old reservoirs extended. People forgot their apprehensions until the next alarm, the next prophecies of catastrophe.
    
56. None of this would matter if the fears had no cost. But that is not the case. Fear of running out has been a malign presence for more than a century, driving imperialist forays, stoking hatred among nations, fueling war and rebellion.
    
57. Technocracy Incorporated, a crusading effort to establish a government of all-knowing, hyper-logical engineers and scientists—men rather like Hubbert himself, as it happened. (Hubbert had impeccable academic credentials: undergraduate, master’s, and doctoral degrees from the University of Chicago.) Technocracy adherents believed that the world was controlled by flows of energy and mineral resources, and that society should be based on this understanding.
    
58. Rather than allowing economies to dance to the senseless, febrile beat of supply and demand, Technocrats wanted to organize them on the basis of a quantity controlled by the eternal laws of physics: energy.
    
59. “It is commonly asked, when will the world’s supply of oil be exhausted?” wrote the MIT economist Morris Adelman. “The best one-word answer: never.” On its face, this seems ridiculous—how could a finite stock be inexhaustible, when a constantly renewed flow can run out? But more than a century of experience has shown it to be true. As a practical matter, we know only that there is more than enough for the foreseeable future. That is, fossil-fuel supplies have no known bounds. In strict technical terms, this means they are infinite. Hardly anyone who is not an economist believes this, though.
    
60. Sun power’s image as the province of baling-wire hippies was at odds with reality. Today’s multibillion-dollar photovoltaic industry owes its existence mainly to the Pentagon and Big Oil. The first wide-scale use of solar panels had come in the 1960s: powering military satellites, which couldn’t use fossil fuels (too bulky to lift into space) or batteries (impossible to recharge in orbit). By the 1970s photovoltaics were cheaper, but the industry had acquired only one major new user: the petroleum industry. Some 70 percent of the solar modules sold in the United States were bought to run offshore drilling platforms.
    
61. Realizing that solar had become essential to oil production, petroleum firms set up their own photovoltaic subsidiaries. Exxon became, in 1973, the first commercial manufacturer of solar panels; the second, a year later, was a joint venture with the oil giant Mobil.
    
62. (Exxon and Mobil merged in 1999.) The Atlantic Richfield Company (ARCO), another oil colossus, ran the world’s biggest solar company until it was acquired by Royal Dutch Shell, the oil and gas multinational. Later the title of world’s biggest solar company passed to British Petroleum (now known as BP). By 1980 petroleum firms owned six of the ten biggest U.S. solar firms, representing most of the world’s photovoltaic manufacturing capacity.
    
63. To Margulis, the Great Oxidation Event had lessons for today. The first was that people who thought that living creatures couldn’t affect the climate had no idea of the power of life. The second was that the onset of climate change meant that Homo sapiens was getting into the biological big leagues—we were tiptoeing into the terrain of bacteria, algae, and other truly important creatures.
    
64. The results were worth the effort, if not, perhaps, the marriage. Arrhenius believed that he had established a remarkable fact: tiny changes in airborne carbon dioxide could cause an ice age. Indeed, he said, halving the level of carbon dioxide—reducing it from .03 percent to .015 percent—would cool the world by about 8°F,
    
65. The harder one looks at the problem, the more confusing it seems. “The problems of climate change,” says the New York University philosopher Dale Jamieson, “swamp the machinery of morality.” (“A perfect moral storm,” says Stephen M. Gardiner, another philosopher.) The basis for arguing for action on climate change is the belief that we have a moral responsibility to people in the future. But this is asking one group of people to make wrenching changes to help a completely different set of people to whom they have no tangible connection. Indeed, this other set of people doesn’t exist. When one tries to make plans for nonexistent people, the result is an intellectual quagmire, because there is no way to know what those hypothetical future people will want.
    
66. Not so fast, says Samuel Scheffler, a New York University philosopher who is the author of Death and the Afterlife (2013). The way people feel and act about their individual futures is not the same as how they feel and act about our species’s collective future. In his book, Scheffler discusses another book: Children of Men,
    
67. society. Logically speaking, the desolation in Children of Men is peculiar. As Scheffler points out, all people have known from childhood that they will die. As individuals, we have no long-term future. Personal extinction is guaranteed. But this tragedy—one that will be directly experienced by every single man, woman, and child—provokes no public alarm. No tabloid has ever blared the headline, “All 7.3 Billion of Us to Vanish Within Decades.” Our conviction that life is worth living is “more threatened by the prospect of humanity’s disappearance than by the prospect of our own deaths,”
    
68. Here, at last, we join the second approach to thinking about climate change: how political institutions have grappled with it. In a sense, the answer is simple: they have viewed it as a kind of logical culmination of the environmental movement. Which is to say that it became the heir of an entire history—Vogt’s history, in part.
    
69. Two years after winning the divisive 1968 election, President Richard Nixon, a Republican, declared that “the environment,” “the great question of the ’70s,” was a “cause beyond party and beyond factions.” The Clean Air Act of that year, which set up U.S. emissions regulations, was one of the world’s first general air-quality laws, more stringent and comprehensive than any of its predecessors. Congress passed it overwhelmingly: 73–0 in the Senate, 374–1 in the House of Representatives. Business generally endorsed the legislation; the smog blanketing U.S. cities was obviously harmful and obviously in need of control. Such was the consensus that the distinguished sociologist David L. Sills could observe in 1975 that the new environmental movement “contains all shades of political opinion from the conservative right to the radical left.” With little dissent, Washington passed twenty-one major environmental bills, one after another, in the 1970s.
    
70. The result was a dance that became ever more dysfunctional, as the Emory University historian Patrick Allitt wrote in A Climate of Crisis (2014), his history of the environmental movement. Time and again, activists and corporate executives railed against each other. Time and again, regulatory syntheses emerged from this clash: rules for air, water, toxins. Often enough, businesspeople discovered that the new regulation was less costly than they had feared; environmentalists, meanwhile, found out that the problem was less dire than they had feared.
    
71. The process that had led, often disagreeably, to successful environmental action in the 1970s brought on political stasis by the 1990s. Environmental issues became ways for politicians to flag their clan identity to supporters—less statements about practical problems with solutions that people could debate than symbols of identity. They signaled membership in a cause: taking back the country, either from tyrannical liberal elitism or right-wing greed.
    
72. Unfortunately, as the economists Gernot Wagner and Martin L. Weitzman lament in their book Climate Shock (2015), the likely range of increase from doubling carbon dioxide levels foreseen in the last IPCC report—2.7°–8.1°F (1.5–4.5°C)—was exactly what it was in 1979. Four decades of additional research has not brought us closer to predicting the precise impact of dumping carbon dioxide into the air.
    
73. A Chinese-U.S.-Israeli research team has estimated that eliminating coal pollution in northern China would raise average life expectancy there by more than five years. (By contrast, wiping out all cancer would increase U.S. or European life expectancy by three years.)
    
74. About 85 percent of the world’s carbon dioxide emissions come from fossil fuels, and about 80 percent of those come from just two sources: coal (46 percent) in its various forms, including anthracite and lignite; and petroleum (33 percent) in its various forms, including oil, gasoline, and propane.
    
75. The implications are profound. Oil and gasoline use is diffuse, scattered in the global crowd. The world has 1.3 billion vehicles and perhaps 1.5 billion households. Cutting emissions from these cars and homes means changing the daily lives of billions of people, a mind-boggling thought. Reducing global coal emissions, by contrast, means dealing with 3,300 big coal-fired power plants and several thousand big coal-driven steel and cement factories.
    
76. Common estimates are that this kind of carbon capture will gobble 10 to 15 percent of a power plant’s output. Given that even the most efficient coal plants translate less than 50 percent of the energy in coal into electricity, deploying CCS means that power plants will consume 20 to 30 percent more of the black stuff—at minimum. Mitigating the environmental costs of digging up and burning coal in this way means digging up and burning even more coal.
    
77. Safety usually is measured by the number of deaths in the “energy chain”—that is, how many people are killed by the entire cycle, from exploration and mining to refining and transportation to actual power generation, as well as waste treatment and disposal. Deaths from mining uranium are counted, as well as deaths from falling off roofs while installing solar panels (a surprisingly big number). Adding these together, a research team at the Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland’s biggest research center, reckoned in 2016 that nukes thus far have caused fewer deaths than any other power source except hydroelectric
    
78. More distressing still, several thousand coal mines have caught fire in Australia, Britain, China, India, Indonesia, New Zealand, Russia, South Africa, and the United States; many have been burning for decades, some for centuries. An infamous example is the Jharia coalfield, in the northeastern Indian state of Jharkand. Covering 170 square miles, Jharia is India’s main reservoir of coking coal, the hard coal used to make steel. It has been on fire, calamitously, since 1916;
    
79. The greatest danger posed by planet-hacking comes from its greatest virtue: its low cost. Wagner and Weitzman, the economists, call it a “free-driver” problem; driving the car is so cheap, anyone can take it for a spin. Spraying sulfur is cheap and easy enough that a single rogue nation could reengineer the planet by itself. Or two countries could separately decide to alter the climate in conflicting ways. China, worried about drought, could seek to increase its monsoon; India, fearful of flooding, could try to decrease rainfall. “Both are nuclear weapons states,” Keith reminds us. According to Forbes magazine, the world has 1,600 billionaires. Each could sponsor a course of
    
80. As it turned out, both Muir’s rapture over wild beauty and Pinchot’s thoughts of stewardship had a dark side: most of these “untouched” American landscapes in fact were inhabited by indigenous peoples. Yellowstone and Yosemite were turned into parks by expelling people who had been there for centuries. As the journalist Mark Dowie has documented, similar dispossessions in the name of Nature have taken place ever since. All too often, the results have been dreadful, both morally, because they involve tearing people from their homes, and practically, because these areas were molded in the shapes of their first inhabitants.
    
81. Over time, this loosely defined environmental establishment—British critics sometimes call it the “green blob”—would go on to lead campaigns against pollution, awaken the world to threats of extinction, acquire and set aside huge tracts of land, and play a prominent role in the sterilization of millions of women, under varying degrees of compulsion.
    
82. To official Washington, Point Four was a complete surprise. Truman had not consulted a single member of his staff, including his secretary of state, before making this unprecedented commitment to promote the welfare of other nations.
    
83. The results of the campaigns were ghastly. Millions of women were sterilized, often coercively, sometimes illegally, frequently in unsafe conditions, in Mexico, Bolivia, Peru, Indonesia, Bangladesh, and, especially, India. In the 1970s and 1980s the Indian government, then led by Indira Gandhi and her son Sanjay, embraced policies that in many states required sterilization for men and women to obtain water, electricity, ration cards, medical care, and pay raises. Teachers could expel students from school if their parents weren’t sterilized. More than 8 million men and women were sterilized in 1975 alone.
    
84. As a whole, U.S. forests are bigger and healthier than they were in 1900, when the country had fewer than 100 million people. Many New England states have as many trees as they had in the days of Paul Revere. Nor was this growth restricted to North America: Europe’s forest resources increased by about 40 percent from 1970 to 2015, a time in which its population grew from 462 million to 743 million.
    
85. Years ago I had the chance to ask this question of Dennis Meadows, coleader of the research team that produced The Limits to Growth. “You can look at Lake Erie or Detroit and see it’s gotten better,” he said. “But to leap from that to the conclusion that there has been overall improvement is to look at one person getting rich and say that everybody is better off.” Then a professor emeritus at the University of New Hampshire, Meadows and his co-workers had updated Limits several times, each update as pessimistic or more so than the original book. “When a rich country becomes concerned about environmental problems,” Meadows told me, “then it can typically develop effective responses.” Lead additives in gasoline became a subject of U.S. worries, he pointed out. Washington forced petroleum companies to pay to phase out leaded gas and car companies to pay to change their engines and drivers to pay more at the pump. Money was flung at the problem, and lead levels diminished. I dutifully quoted Meadows to this effect in an article. Only a year after it was published did it occur to me that this argument might amount to saying that economic growth in fact allows societies to buy their way out of environmental problems—a Borlaugian stance.
    
86. After months of insisting that the crisis was due to hoarding—Indian farmers’ purported “tendency to withhold foodgrains from the market” to get better prices—Secretary of State for India Leo Amery reversed course and in November 1943 begged Prime Minister Winston Churchill to send food to Bengal. Churchill ignored the request with a quip about “Indians breeding like rabbits and being paid a million a day by us to do nothing about the war.” No food shipments occurred. About 3 million people starved to death.
    
87. It would not be accurate to say that the Cuban missile crisis was responsible for ending famine in India, but it would also be incorrect to say that the two events were unrelated to each other.
    
88. To Borlaug, the resistance seemed to be due, at least in part, to a bureaucratic fear of confronting high officials. The “first step” in the Green Revolution, he stated, was “the vigorous introduction” of “heavy rates of chemical fertilizers.” (Nitrogen! Get that rubisco going!) Yet India was dragging its feet. The nation had few fertilizer plants, which meant that most fertilizer had to be imported, which meant in turn that it had to be paid for with foreign exchange. According to the Indiana University historian Nick Cullather, Nehru’s development plan reserved four-fifths of India’s foreign-exchange reserves for heavy equipment for industry. The remainder was for importing “essential raw materials.” Fertilizer, an agricultural raw material, was given a lower priority than industrial raw materials like jute, the plant fiber in burlap or gunny cloth, because burlap and gunny cloth could be manufactured in India and sold abroad, recouping the foreign exchange used to buy jute. Meanwhile, fertilizer was a foreign-exchange loss—the food it produced was not exported, but used to feed Indians. As a result, so little fertilizer was imported that aid officials liked to say that India was not overpopulated—it was underfertilized.
    
89. Later Subramaniam came back into the government as Indira Gandhi’s finance minister. “He always liked to say that the single finest hour in Borlaug’s life was the time he spent shouting at Ashok Mehta,” Swaminathan told me. “It may be true.” To the end of his days, Subramaniam believed that the meeting convinced Mehta to throw the Indian government’s support fully to agriculture.
    
90. When I first visited Mumbai, in the mid-1980s, my friends and I spent a few days walking around the city. It was not hard to find evidence of extreme poverty. At one point a couple of kids in a schoolyard invited us to visit their class. Because we had nothing else to do, we agreed. In the classroom, the students goggled at us. It was like show and tell, and we were the show. The school was a charity effort, with most of the students from destitute families. They wore cast-off chinos and T-shirts from the charity. Afterward the teacher offered us tea. I asked where the students came from. Most were kicked out of their villages by the Green Revolution, he said, matter-of-factly. The city is full of these people.
    
91. Between 1972 and 1979 the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development published fifteen analyses of the Green Revolution. Every single one was sharply negative.
    
92. Perhaps the most influential and unequivocal study was The Political Economy of Agrarian Change (1974) by the Oxford economist Keith Griffin. His summation: “The story of the green revolution is a story of a revolution that failed.” Between 1970 and 1989, more than three hundred academic studies of the Green Revolution appeared. Four out of five were negative.
    
93. When I last spoke to Borlaug, a few years before he passed away, I asked him about the past criticisms. Critics, he said, never wanted to answer the counterfactual question: Where would the world be today if we had the same growth in population and affluence but none of the yield increases of the Green Revolution? Overuse of fertilizer, water-logging soils, loading up land with toxic salts from badly run irrigation schemes—these were real issues, he said. But wouldn’t you rather have these for problems than the kind of hunger we had in 1968? He asked me if I had ever been to a place where most of the people weren’t getting enough to eat. “Not just poor, but actually hungry all the time,” he said. I told him that I hadn’t been to such a place. “That’s the point,” he said. “When I was getting started, you couldn’t avoid them.”
    
94. Part of the bishop’s cleverness lay in his decision to attack Darwin mainly on scientific grounds, rather than invoking Christian dogma. From the beginning of his review, Wilberforce targeted Origin’s greatest weakness: the paucity of direct evidence for the evolution of one species from another.
    
95. But now that science and technology have allowed the human enterprise to risk its own survival, the partisans of hope have stepped back from some of Huxley’s implications. Wizards and Prophets each have a separate blueprint for the future. But both assume that Wilberforce, not Huxley, was correct—that human beings are special creatures who can escape the fate of other successful species. If the Oxford debate was a morality play, the vices and virtues have slipped offstage and switched masks.
    
96. Daniel B. Botkin, an ecologist who had recently retired from the University of California at Santa Barbara. Botkin has worked in many areas but is perhaps best known for Discordant Harmonies (1990), a classic study debunking the long-held belief that ecosystems will exist in a timeless balance unless people disturb them.
    
97. War. The brutality of these conflicts is difficult to grasp; to cite an example from the Israeli political scientist Azar Gat, Germany lost between a fifth and a third of its population in the Thirty Years’ War—“higher than the German casualties in the First and Second World Wars combined.” The statistic is sobering: Germany lost a greater percentage of its people to violence in the seventeenth century than in the twentieth, despite the intervening advances in the technology of slaughter, despite being governed for more than a decade by maniacs who systematically murdered millions of their fellow citizens.
    
98. As many as one out of every ten people met a violent death in the first millennium A.D., the archaeologist Ian Morris has estimated. Ever since, violence has declined—gradually,
    
